CartoDB notes tutorial

It doesn't seem to like having more than 1 person with the same latitude and longtitude. This is problematic for genealogical mapping.
However, if we try and do it individually (one person, over a course of a lifetime), that would work. BUT I think you might have to have different excel/datasets for each one (so one would be NAME, age etc.)

Do it on a family basis. Each family gets an id? Give them slightly off coordinates.
CartoDB only works if someone is moving around consistently over the course of their lifetime...which we know people didn't do really. 

So how do you visualise multiple people in the same area, but still having them as individuals rather than a collective/group?

Group the original family, then have "break-off groups"

Simplify? Just make it the 1 family, since they all have the same ethnicity, then split into the other family?

Still how does that get represented.
Family 1: la/long, ethn, la/long, ethn etc.

Then create seperate tables for people who've left?

What if you do a family that moves around a bit,

1861--size 11, Nipissing
1871-size 10, Mattawa,  2 in (place)
1881-size 8, Mattawa, 2 in (place), 8 in (place)
1901, size 4, Mattawa, 2 in North Bay, 8 in (place)

Using this model, I inputted the data.Ther first vis. is the simple. This really doesn't do much. But by clicking on the Wizards, we can change the vis. Cluster does a great job, marking how many people have the sam lat/long for that location. 

Choropleth does not work as well, since it seems to want to automatically use Lat/Long for the column to sort. You can also add a label, which is really nice.

In Category, you have the ability to change the column it's sorting by, so in this case I did Year. Again, you can customise your colour. You can also customise it by clicking on the buble, you can change what info gets shows.
While the colours look interesting, it doesn't really capture the number of people in one location. Again, it only puts 1 bubble for the people in one spot.

Cluster doesn't work either, again it wants you to do just long/lat.
Torque can work well, if we conver the time appropriately.
So once you put the time in the proper format, it works pretty well. The one thing is its a bit slow.

Now the heat-map, that works pretty well. Very effective
AND you can put year time-lapse. Again, slow, and I don't like it.
Love this version. Looks great.

Torque Cat was very good too.


