Python, Pip and Data Mining the Internet
(The Programming Historian's Tutorials)

Seeing as I finally managed to get some sort of a handle on Wget, I set off to try the next tutorial on the list. (Data Mining the Internet Archive Collection)[http://programminghistorian.org/lessons/data-mining-the-internet-archive].

First things first, I learned my lesson to read more carefully the instructions, and I started on the Programming Historian lesson on pip. (side-bar: this kind of instruction irritates me. It makes the learner have to navigate away from the original lesson to a new tutorial, which takes time to complete. For this specific tutorial, I also had to find another tutorial on Python, since I didn't have that installed.)

Per the tutorial, I opened and saved the get-pip.py to my python directory. Seems simple, right? Next, to run it. Okay! Opening CommandPrompt, I navigated to my python directory, and ran the command:

python get-pip.py to install pip.

Problem number one, which looked like this:
C:\Python27>python get-pip.py to install pip
File "get-pip.py", line 1
From: "Saved by Internet Explorer 11"
SyntaxError: invalid syntax

...well that's not good.
I tried downloadig it again, and reading the instructions again. Same issue.

Thankfully, answers are never far away with Slack. Dr. Graham to the rescue!
First recommendation, try python --version
Response: Python 2.7.11

No luck.

Next step, let's check out why the error message is coming up. Open up get-pip.py in a text editor (such as Komodo).
Looks like this: get-pip.PNG

Okay, so this is the problem. Instead of a program, I downloaded html.
(side-instruction, ditch Internet Explorer. Okay, completed.)

Alright, with the get-pip.py identified as the problem, let's try re-downloading it. To do this, Dr. Graham shared this image: get-pip.py
I copy and pasted this into my text editor, and saved it as get-pip.py in my Python folder. 

Another option for this step is to use Chrome and open this link:https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py
Save as, and put it in your Python folder with the name "get-pip.py"

Alright, let's try running our original command (python get-pip.py to install pip.) again.
python2.png

Success!
My reaction: It's Alive!

Problem conquered? Let's move along.
Opp, not very far. The next step (well really the *first* step of the actual Programing Historian tutorial is downloading (using python/pip) internetarchive and pymarc.
This is the error I recieved: python3

Dr. Graham again to the rescue. He suggested inserting the command "python -m pip install pymarc"
Success! This is what resulted:
python 4


I ran the same command except with "internetarchive", again a success.

But, something Dr. Graham asked, why did "-m" make a difference? (NB: follow up)

kept getting an error message that import was not a command


import internetarchive
search = internetarchive.search_items('collection:nasa')
print search.num_found **(Save this as mysearch.py)

When you are at the command line
python mysearch.py

Identation matters in Python. Carries symantic meaning. Use tab key, or space, but DO NOT use both.

Typing in python brings you to your interpreter (you will know because it will give you >>>)

item - internetarchive.get_item('lettertowilliamdoug00doug')



